                                                    A General Framework for Knowledge Integration in Machine
                                                  Learning for Electromagnetic Scattering Using Quasinormal Modes

                                                        Viktor A. Lilja, Albin J. Svärdsby, Timo Gahlmann, and Philippe Tassin
                                                  Department of Physics, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Göteborg, Sweden
                                                                                 (Dated: April 14, 2026)




arXiv:2509.06130v2 [physics.optics] 13 Apr 2026




                                                                                          1
     ABSTRACT


     Neural networks have been demonstrated to be able to accelerate the modeling and inverse
design of optical and electromagnetic devices by serving as fast surrogates for electromagnetic
solvers. Nevertheless, such neural networks can be unreliable and normally require extreme
amounts of data to train. Here it is shown that these limitations can be alleviated by
constraining neural-network models using prior knowledge about the governing physics. We
propose a universal physics-informed neural network framework for electromagnetic scattering
based on the quasinormal mode expansion of the scattering matrix. The neural networks learn
the resonant structure underlying the scattering spectrum, are guaranteed to obey energy
conservation and causality, and are shown to have significantly improved data efficiency for
photonic-crystal slabs and all-dielectric free-form metasurfaces. Furthermore, the framework
allows additional problem-specific constraints, such as losslessness, symmetries, and number
of modes, to be imposed manually when they are available. The method can be applied to a
wide range of optical and electromagnetic devices owing to the generality of the quasinormal
mode formalism.



I.    INTRODUCTION


     Machine learning [1, 2] is a powerful tool for inverse design in electromagnetism, mechanics,
materials science, quantum many-body systems, and other paradigms of physics [3–14]. The
goal of inverse design is to find a device design that exhibits some predefined properties [15–
19]. For linear electromagnetic devices, the properties are often quantities that describe
the relation between incoming and outgoing amplitudes of electromagnetic modes, such as
transmittance, reflectance, or absorption [6–8, 14, 18–41]. These quantities can be derived
from the frequency-dependent scattering matrix S(ω), which encodes the complete scattering
response of a general linear N -port device by relating the amplitudes s− = (s−            −
                                                                              1 , . . . , sN ) of

the incoming modes to the amplitudes s+ = (s+            +
                                            1 , . . . , sN ) of the outgoing modes through

s− = S(ω)s+ . The forward problem of finding S(ω) for a given design can be easily solved
with full-wave electrodynamics solvers. The inverse problem of finding a design with a desired
S(ω) is, on the other hand, significantly more challenging and fundamentally ill-posed, since
a given S(ω) can have zero or several corresponding designs. Traditional inverse-design

                                               2
methods use optimization algorithms to search through the design space, often requiring
hundreds to thousands of sequential full-wave simulations to converge. Another approach is
to first replace the simulator with a neural network (NN) trained to predict S(ω) given a
design parametrization, summarized schematically as

                                               NN
                                        Design −−→ S(ω).

Once trained, this forward model can typically predict S(ω) orders of magnitude faster than
an electrodynamics solver and its gradient can easily be calculated using backpropagation.
This allows for efficient exploration of the design space through iterative optimization [19, 42]
or the training of inverse models [22, 30, 32–34, 38, 43]. The downside of this approach is that
the performance of the final design becomes dependent on the accuracy of the NN. Although
it may be possible to improve accuracy by increasing the number of trainable parameters
and the number of training samples, computational resources are often a limiting factor [13].
Furthermore, the black box nature of NNs makes them unreliable and very limited insights
can be gained from their predictions [44].
   These issues can be alleviated by utilizing prior knowledge about the governing physics [44,
45], a strategy often referred to as physics-informed machine learning. One physics-informed
method, which has recently gathered attention in electromagnetic scattering problems [14,
20, 25, 29], is to include a physics layer as a final step in the forward model. The augmented
forward model can be schematically summarized as

                                   NN    Physics     Physics model
                          Design −−→                 −−−−−−−−→ S(ω),                          (1)
                                        parameters

where the physics model is a known computable expression for S(ω) with the physics
parameters as arguments. Now, any constraints imposed on the physics model will also be
satisfied by the full forward model. Furthermore, the task of the NN has become to predict
the physics parameters rather than S(ω) directly, which may be easier to learn. Indeed,
previous works have demonstrated that using a physics layer reduces prediction error for
a given NN size [14, 25, 29], improves generalization [20, 25, 29], and reduces the required
amount of training data [20, 29]. Another benefit is that the physics parameters become
accessible as a learned latent description [20, 29] that can be used as a design target in the
inverse problem [14]. The forward model also becomes less of a black box in the sense that

                                              3
the predicted spectra can be explained in terms of the physics parameters. Implementing
the physics model in a numerical framework that supports automatic differentiation enables
the full forward model to be trained directly on simulated S(ω). This is in contrast to the
methods proposed in References [28, 42, 46–48], where the physics parameters are extracted
from S(ω) before training.
      Various physics models that exploit the resonant structure of the scattering matrix have
been proposed in the literature [14, 25, 29], but are either tailored to specific device geome-
tries [14, 29], making their range of applicability limited, or rely on spectral decompositions
without a formal theoretical basis [25], making the physics parameters hard to interpret. How-
ever, the general and exact relation between resonances and scattering parameters is, in fact,
known and is formalized by the theory of quasinormal modes (QNMs) [49, 50]. We propose a
physics-informed NN architecture based on the QNM expansion of the scattering matrix. We
will refer to this architecture as the QNM-Net. Owing to the generality of the QNM formalism,
the QNM-Net is universal in the sense that it can be applied to linear electromagnetic devices
with an arbitrary number of resonances and scattering ports. Furthermore, by implementing
the QNM-Net as a modular framework rather than a fixed architecture, we are able to use
the rich physics of the QNM formalism to manually tailor the model implementation to the
unique physics of each problem. This makes our method simultaneously more general than
previous methods while also allowing for stronger problem-specific constraints to be imposed.


II.     QUASINORMAL-MODE-BASED NEURAL NETWORK


      QNMs are a generalization of normal modes to lossy systems. They are defined as
eigenmodes of the source-free Maxwell’s equations

                                     ∇ × Ẽm = iω̃m µH̃m ,
                                                                                            (2)
                                     ∇ × H̃m = −iω̃m εẼm ,
with outgoing radiation boundary conditions, where ω̃m is the QNM eigenfrequency, m
enumerates the QNMs, and ε and µ material parameters describing a linear and local
material response. Due to the open boundary and material absorption, the eigenproblem is
non-Hermitian and ω̃m = ωm + iγm complex-valued. The imaginary part γm corresponds to
a decay in time and can be decomposed as γm = γr,m + γnr,m , where γr,m is due to radiative
losses and γnr,m is due to nonradiative losses [51, 52].

                                              4
   A connection can be made between S(ω) and the QNMs by expanding the scattered
electromagnetic field as a sum of the QNM fields Ẽm and H̃m [49, 50, 53]. This so-called
quasinormal mode expansion of the scattering matrix makes it clear that the QNM frequencies
ω̃m correspond to resonances in the scattering spectrum, as illustrated in Figure 1. Many
different versions of the expansion can be found in the literature [49, 50, 53, 54]. In this
work, we use the form

                     S(ω) = eiωτ [C(ω) + D(iω − iΩ̃)−1 M −1 D† C(ω)]eiωτ ,                    (3)

which is approximate but specifically formulated to respect energy conservation even when
a finite number of QNMs are included in the expansion [54], making it suitable for our
application. In this expression, for an N -port device with P modes, C(ω) is an N × N matrix
representing a slowly varying background, D is an N × P matrix with columns dm , Ω̃ is a
diagonal matrix of QNM frequencies ω̃m , and M is a P × P matrix with elements
                                                    d†m dp
                                     Mmp =                 ∗
                                                               ,
                                               iω̃r,p − iω̃r,m
where ω̃r,m = ωm + iγr,m . The N complex-valued elements of dm should be interpreted as
the amplitudes of the m:th QNM on the ports. Finally, τ is a diagonal N × N matrix of real
numbers τn that determine the phase accumulated between the scatterer and the ports. We
refer to Reference [54] for a more in-depth description, derivation, and error analysis.




                        Loss


                                   Frequency



Figure 1. Relation between the S matrix and QNMs of a fictitious 2-port scattering device. Right:
The scattering matrix S relates the amplitudes s±
                                                n of incoming (+) and outgoing (−) waves. Top

left: Resonances are observed when plotting elements of S as a function of frequency. Bottom left:
Each resonance corresponds to a complex pole of S(ω). The poles are eigenfrequencies ω̃m of QNMs.



   Our proposed physics-informed NN architecture incorporates the QNM expansion as a
physics model according to the principle shown in the schematic in Equation (1). The physics

                                               5
parameters are in our case C(ω) and τ , as well as ω̃m and dm for each mode m. We use a
modular architecture composed of multiple submodels as illustrated in Figure 2 to facilitate
adaptation to a wide range of systems. The first submodel maps the design description
to an abstract feature vector φ. The subsequent submodels use φ to predict the physics
parameters evaluated at frequency ω. Finally, S(ω) is computed from the physics parameters
using the QNM expansion (3). The internal structure of the submodels is left unspecified
and can be tailored to the specific physics of each system.
                          Trainable
                                             Background
                          Fixed expression     model


                                                               QNM-
                        Design    Feature
                                              Mode             Expansion
                                 extractor
                                              models           Eq. (3)


                                             Embedding
                                               model



Figure 2. Overview of the QNM-Net architecture. White boxes are submodels with trainable
parameters, the gray box is an analytical physics model with no trainable parameters. Arrows
indicate the relations between inputs and outputs of each submodel.




III.    RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


   A.    Photonic crystal slab


   We demonstrate the QNM-Net on two example systems. The first example is a photonic
crystal (PhC) slab, consisting of a sheet of lossless dielectric with a repeating pattern of
holes. We study transmission and reflection at normal incidence. The design is described by
five parameters (h, r1 , r2 , r3 , r4 ) as illustrated in Figure 3(a). Four-fold rotational symmetry
is enforced to ensure polarization independence, resulting in a S matrix of size 2 × 2. The
scattering spectrum in the frequency range of interest is dominated by a single Fano resonance
on an otherwise smooth background, as exemplified in Figure 3(b).
   Having defined the system, we now choose the implementation of the QNM-Net submodels
based on our prior knowledge about its physics. Consulting the diagram in Figure 2, the
background model should take φ and ω as inputs and return the corresponding background

                                                6
                           (a)                     (b)
                                                           solid: simulation   dashed: QNM-Net



                                             S11




                                            S21                       Frequency (THz)
                           (c)       ×103            (d)      ×10−4
                             1.5                                                    Reference
                                                                                       34k
                             1.0                                                       220k
                                                                                       2.3M
                             0.5
                                                                                    QNM-Net
                                 0                                                    14k




Figure 3. Applying the QNM-Net to PhC slabs. (a) Illustration of the PhC parametrization and
geometry. (b) Simulated and QNM-Net-predicted S parameters for a sample from the validation set.
(c) Histogram of test losses for the QNM-Net when using 20 % of the dataset. (d) Validation loss
as a function of dataset size for the QNM-Net and standard NNs. Markers show cross-validation
average, vertical bars show lowest and highest values. Numbers in the legend refer to the number
of trainable parameters.


matrix C(ω). Because the PhC is reciprocal, lossless, and mirror symmetric, C satisfies
C T = C, C † C = I, and C11 = C22 [54], so we set
                                                      
                                        i sin α cos α
                                C=                     eiα .                                   (4)
                                         cos α i sin α

To allow for a design-dependent slow variation with frequency, we let α = α(ω) be a linear
function of ω with values at 170 THz and 210 THz predicted from φ using a single-layer NN.
Next, the mode models should predict the QNM frequencies ω̃m and port amplitudes dm
from φ, with each mode model corresponding to one mode in the QNM expansion. Since the
scattering spectrum of the PhC is well approximated by a single resonance, we only use one
mode model in this case. Furthermore, because the PhC is reflection symmetric, the QNMs
are either even or odd, corresponding to dm = (1, 1) or dm = (1, −1), respectively [49, 54].
The observed Fano mode is even, so we set d1 = (1, 1). The material of the PhC being lossless
implies γnr,1 = 0. We let the remaining unknown and design-dependent mode parameters ω1
and γr,1 be predicted from φ using a single-layer NN, with causality enforced by applying

                                                         7
a strictly positive activation function to γr,1 [54]. The embedding model should predict τn
from φ. We use a single-layer NN to predict τ1 from φ and set τ2 = τ1 to respect reflection
symmetry. Finally, we use a fully-connected feed-forward NN in the feature extractor to
provide the bulk of the trainable weights of the network. A linear skip connection was added
to improve training robustness and convergence speed [14]. A detailed schematic of all the
submodels is provided in the Supporting Information.
   To train the QNM-Net, we generated a dataset of 10 000 random PhC designs and
their corresponding scattering spectra S(ω) at 200 equally spaced frequency points using
frequency-domain finite-element method simulations. The QNM-Net was trained to minimize
the S-parameter mean-squared-error (S-MSE), defined as
                                   1 X predicted
                      S-MSE =               |S   (ωk ) − Sijtrue (ωk )|2 ,
                                 NS Nω i,j,k ij

where NS is the number of elements Sij in the scattering matrix and Nω is the number of
sampled frequencies ωk . Gradients were automatically backpropagated through the entire
model, including the QNM-expansion, using automatic differentiation. Models were trained
on 80 % of the dataset, while the remaining 20 % was used for validation. The validation error
was averaged over five dataset splits. More details about the neural-network implementation
and training procedures are provided in the Supporting Information.
   The trained QNM-Net is able to reproduce the simulated scattering accurately, as ex-
emplified by the sample shown in Figure 3(b). The sample has an S-MSE of 2.1 × 10−4 ,
which is close to the mean of the loss histogram shown in Figure 3(c). The histogram was
evaluated on a test set separate from both the validation and training sets to avoid bias.
For reference, we compare the QNM-Net to three standard fully-connected feed-forward
NNs with varying numbers of trainable parameters, similar to architectures used in forward
models in the literature [19, 22, 23, 27, 38]. Figure 3(d) shows the validation loss for all
models at different dataset sizes. The parameter count of all models are listed in the legend
of the figure. The QNM-Net requires only 2 % of the dataset, corresponding to 160 training
samples, to achieve an S-MSE less than 10−3 . The reference models require approximately
one order of magnitude more data and trainable parameters to achieve a similar loss. This
shows that the QNM-Net can reduce the need for training data significantly by learning the
physics of the system in terms of its QNMs.
   Another benefit of physics-informed models operating according to the principle shown

                                             8
in the schematic in Equation (1) is that their predictions are explainable in terms of the
network-predicted physics parameters [29], which for the QNM-Net are C(ω), ω̃m , dm , and τn .
Based on the theoretical foundations of the QNM expansion, we know that ω̃m correspond
exactly to eigenfrequencies of Maxwell’s equations (2). Thus, the accuracy of the learned
physics can be verified by comparing the network-predicted ω̃m to eigenfrequencies calculated
using full-wave eigenmode simulations. Figure 4 shows the network-predicted ω̃1 and the
closest simulated eigenfrequency for 100 new randomly generated designs for the PhC slab
example. The two methods agree to high precision, indicating that the network training has
converged to a representation of the spectra that matches the correct underlying physics for
this system. It should be noted that, although finding the correct QNM parameters should
lead to vanishing S-MSE and thus correspond to minima in the NN loss landscape, there is
no guarantee that these minima are unique or that the training procedure will always find
them. Thus, validating the trained model with a reference eigenmode solver as shown here is
necessary if the accuracy of the learned physics is of importance.
                                                                                  Frequency
                                          QNM-Net                                R 2 = 0.99985

                                                                       QNM-Net
                                          Simulation
                                      4




                      Damping (THz)
                                      3
                                                                                  Simulation
                                      2                                            Damping
                                                                                 R 2 = 0.99943

                                                                       QNM-Net
                                      1

                                      0
                                             180       190       200              Simulation
                                               Frequency (THz)

Figure 4. Comparison between ω̃1 learned by the QNM-Net and calculated by full-wave eigenmode
simulations for the PhC geometry. Left: QNM frequency and damping for 100 randomly generated
designs. Each dot/cross corresponds to a separate design. Right: Parity plots for frequency and
damping with corresponding coefficient of determination.


   Since the QNM-Net is able to accurately predict the QNM parameters of the PhC, these can
now be used as design targets for inverse design. To demonstrate this, we inverse design five
PhC slabs with linearly increasing eigenfrequency and loss rate. Starting from an initial design
with all design parameters set to zero, the difference between model-predicted and desired

                                                             9
value of ω̃1 was minimized using the Adam optimizer [55] with gradients backpropagated
through the network using automatic differentiation. The optimization converged to the
desired eigenfrequency after a few hundred steps in less than one second. The final designs
were simulated using the full-wave solver as verification. The predicted and simulated results
shown in Figure 5 match closely, demonstrating that a QNM-Net trained solely on spectral
data can be used for fast and accurate inverse design of eigenfrequencies.




                                 Pred.    Sim.

                                 Optimizer path
                                 Predicted
                                 Simulated




Figure 5. Inverse design of PhC slabs. The PhC geometries in the top row were optimized for
linearly spaced complex eigenfrequencies. The thickness of the PhC slab is displayed above each
design. QNM-Net predictions (blue) and full-wave simulations (black) of the PhC reflectivity spectra
and eigenmodes are shown in the middle and lower panels.




   B.   Free-form dielectric metasurface


   To investigate if the QNM-Net approach is also beneficial for more complex geometries
when less is known about the physics, we apply the QNM-Net to free-form all-dielectric
metasurfaces. We use a dataset introduced in Reference [56] containing roughly 80 000 meta-
atoms and their corresponding scattering spectra (more details are available in the Supporting
Information). The geometry is described by a 100 × 100 binary bitmap representing the
etching mask for the metasurface unit cell, as illustrated in Figure 6(a). As far as we
know, no previous works have applied NNs with resonance-based physics models to free-

                                                  10
form designs. This system has a vastly larger design space, lower frequency resolution, a
polarization-dependent scattering response, multiple overlapping resonances, nonradiative
loss, and lacks mirror symmetry due to the presence of a substrate. Furthermore, only two
columns of the S matrix, corresponding to light incident from the top, are available in the
dataset.

                        (a)   1        2   (b)                               A1
                                                 dots: simulation   lines: QNM-Net
                                  Si




                                   SiO2

                              3        4
                                                         Frequency (THz)
                        (c)                      (d)
                                                                         Reference
                          4
                                                                            455k
                                                                            4.3M
                                                                            64M
                          2

                                                                         QNM-Net
                                                                           493k
                          0




Figure 6.   QNM-Net applied to free-form metasurface. (a) Illustration of a metasurface unit
cell and the corresponding bitmap. Numbered arrows indicate the locations and polarizations of
the ports. (b) Simulated and QNM-Net-predicted spectrum. A1 = 1 − Σn |Sn1 |2 is the absorbed
power fraction for incidence on port 1. (c) Histogram of QNM-Net test losses for dataset size 80 %.
(d) Validation loss as a function of dataset size for the QNM-Net and reference models. Numbers in
the legend refer to the number of trainable parameters.


   We again adapt the QNM-Net submodel implementation to our prior knowledge about
the system. Because the design parameterization now has an inherent spatial structure, we
use a version of the convolutional DenseNet architecture [57] which we previously found to
perform well on this dataset [34] as the feature extractor. In this case, there is no clearly
distinguishable background. We therefore set C = −I, which is commonly used in QNM
expansions [49, 54] and let the QNM-Net fit the background using many broad resonances.
The spectra have a varying number of modes within the sampled frequency range. We chose
to include 20 mode models in the QNM-Net, which we deemed to be more than sufficient

                                                   11
based on manual inspection of a few simulated spectra. If a smaller number of modes are
necessary to explain a given spectrum, the QNM-Net can learn to place the superfluous
modes outside the sampled range, so that they do not contribute to the predicted spectrum.
For each mode, the QNM frequency and damping rates, as well as the real and imaginary
parts of dm , are predicted from φ by small NNs. Each mode model has separate trainable
weights. Fixed port delays τn are used to account for the distance between the metasurface
boundary and the ports.
   Subsequently, we compare the QNM-Net to reference models consisting of DenseNets
followed by branched feed-forward NNs, similar to the architecture used in our previous
work [34]. The same DenseNet architecture was used for all models, but the width of the
fully-connected layers was varied to change the number of trainable parameters. Figure 6(b)
shows a simulated spectrum and the corresponding QNM-Net prediction for a sample from
the validation set. The S-MSE of the prediction is 2.4 × 10−3 , which is typical compared
to the histogram shown in Figure 6(c). We observe that the QNM-Net reproduces most
resonances, but fails to predict a few weaker resonances. We believe this is due to the
design space being so large that even tens of thousands of training samples are not enough
to accurately learn all features of the spectra. Nevertheless, Figure 6(d) shows that the
QNM-Net requires only around one third of the data to achieve a loss as low as that of the
best reference models, demonstrating that the method is useful for spectrum prediction also
for this system even if all predicted resonances are not accurate.
   To further investigate the accuracy of the learned QNMs, we conduct an eigenmode study
for three metasurface designs from the validation set with varying number of resonances in
the sampled frequency range. The QNM-Net-predicted eigenfrequencies together with all
eigenfrequencies returned by an eigenmode solver with outgoing radiation boundary conditions
are shown in Figure 7. Most modes predicted by the QNM-Net inside the sampled frequency
range correspond to true eigenmodes found by the simulator. Modes outside this range and
high-damping modes close to the edges are generally not accurate, which is expected since
there is very little information available in the data to learn these modes. Interestingly, designs
that connect the edges of the unit cell (the leftmost and rightmost designs in Figure 7 exhibit
several low-damping modes with no clear corresponding features in the scattering spectra and
no corresponding modes predicted by the QNM-Net. We interpret these as modes that are
very weakly coupled to the incoming radiation and therefore do not contribute significantly

                                               12
to the scattering spectrum. This illustrates that the QNM-Net automatically identifies the
modes that are the most important for the scattering response, whereas eigenmode solvers
return very large numbers of modes that would otherwise be cumbersome to filter manually.

                              A1    dots: simulation   lines: QNM-Net




            QNM-Net
            Simulation




Figure 7.     Eigenmode study for the metasurface example. Each column shows the QNM-Net-
predicted and simulated spectrum (top row) and eigenfrequencies (bottom row) of a different design
(top-right inset) from the validation set. Shaded regions in the bottom row correspond to frequencies
outside the training range.




IV.   CONCLUSION AND FURTHER RESEARCH


   In conclusion, we have demonstrated a modular physics-informed NN architecture for
electromagnetic scattering based on the QNM expansion of the scattering matrix. We
have shown that this architecture requires significantly less trainable parameters and is
substantially more data efficient than conventional NNs for prediction of scattering spectra.
Compared to previous physics-informed NNs for electromagnetic scattering [14, 25, 29], we
expect the QNM-Net to perform similarly in terms of accuracy and data efficiency while
having the benefit of being applicable to a wider range of systems and a more well-founded
theoretical basis in the formalism of quasinormal modes. In particular, the QNM frequencies
learned by the model correspond directly to the eigenmodes of the scatterer, which was
verified by comparing the learned physics to eigenmode simulations. We believe that the
method will be useful for modeling a wide range of electromagnetic systems where the

                                                 13
scattering spectrum is accurately described by a set of resonances.
   The method presented here opens the door to further developments in machine learning
for electromagnetic scattering, which previously was limited to overly simplified systems or
required an amount of training data that was difficult to obtain in practice. The significantly
improved data efficiency can make it practically feasible to train models on experimental
data for simple designs. In the Supporting Information, we add simulated noise to the
training data to demonstrate that the QNM-Net is more robust to noise than standard NNs,
which indicates that the QNM-Net may have additional advantages in this scenario. The
QNM-Net can also be combined with methods such as those presented in References [58, 59]
to account for fabrication-induced performance degradation in inverse design. Furthermore,
investigating the learned parameters can provide insights into the underlying physics for
automated knowledge discovery. For example, if the reflection symmetry of the PhC mode
had not been included as a prior constraint, it could have been discovered by looking at the
model predictions for d1 .
   In future studies, it would be interesting to investigate the effect of individual constraints
to determine which inductive biases are most important for data efficiency. Another possible
development is to use transfer learning of the QNM-Net submodels for further improvements
to data efficiency. For example, the feature extractor could be pretrained as the encoder
network of an autoencoder. The rigorous connection between the QNM expansion and
electromagnetic eigenmodes also makes it possible to train the QNM-Net on eigenmode
simulations. This approach could be particularly useful for sharp resonances that are not
easily resolved in the frequency domain.

   Acknowledgements
   We acknowledge partial financial support from Chalmers’ area of advance Nano (Excellence
Grant), from the Swedish Research Council under Grant No. 2020-05284, and from the Knut
och Alice Wallenberg Stiftelse under Grant No. 2022.0090. Training data generation and NN
training were performed on resources provided by the Swedish National Infrastructure for
Computing (NAISS), at the Chalmers/C3SE and KTH/PDC sites, partially funded by the
Swedish Research Council under Grant No. 2022-06725. The work was performed in part
within the framework of the Excellence Center META-PIX.

   Data Availability

                                              14
   The photonic crystal dataset and code for implementing the QNM-Net are publicly avail-
able in the GitHub repository github.com/ViktorLilja/qnm-net. The freeform metasurface
dataset and code used to generate the results and figures are available from the authors upon
request.




 [1] I. N. Da Silva, D. Hernane Spatti, R. Andrade Flauzino, et al., Artificial Neural Networks: A
    Practical Course, Springer, Cham (2017).
 [2] B. Mehlig, Machine Learning with Neural Networks: An Introduction for Scientists and
    Engineers, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2021).
 [3] P. R. Wiecha, A. Lecestre, N. Mallet, et al., “Pushing the limits of optical information storage
    using deep learning,” Nature Nanotechnology 14, 237–244 (2019).
 [4] R. Iten, T. Metger, H. Wilming, et al., “Discovering physical concepts with neural networks,”
    Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 010508 (2020).
 [5] V. Peano, F. Sapper, and F. Marquardt, “Rapid exploration of topological band structures
    using deep learning,” Phys. Rev. X 11, 021052 (2021).
 [6] P. R. Wiecha, A. Arbouet, C. Girard, et al., “Deep learning in nano-photonics: Inverse design
    and beyond,” Photonics Res. 9, B182 (2021).
 [7] O. Khatib, S. Ren, J. Malof, et al., “Deep Learning the Electromagnetic Properties of Meta-
    materials—A Comprehensive Review,” Adv. Funct. Mater. 31, 2101748 (2021).
 [8] J. Jiang, M. Chen, and J. A. Fan, “Deep neural networks for the evaluation and design of
    photonic devices,” Nat. Rev. Mater. 6, 679–700 (2021).
 [9] M. Zandehshahvar, Y. Kiarashi, M. Chen, et al., “Inverse design of photonic nanostructures
    using dimensionality reduction: Reducing the computational complexity,” Opt. Lett. 46,
    2634–2637 (2021).
[10] M. Zandehshahvar, Y. Kiarashinejad, M. Zhu, et al., “Manifold learning for knowledge discovery
    and intelligent inverse design of photonic nanostructures: Breaking the geometric complexity,”
    ACS Photonics 9, 714–721 (2022).
[11] N. Mohseni, T. Fösel, L. Guo, et al., “Deep learning of quantum many-body dynamics via
    random driving,” Quantum 6, 714 (2022).

                                               15
[12] J. Lee, D. Park, M. Lee, et al., “Machine learning-based inverse design methods considering
    data characteristics and design space size in materials design and manufacturing: a review,”
    Mater. Horiz. 10, 5436–5456 (2023).
[13] M. Sanchez, C. Everly, and P. A. Postigo, “Advances in machine learning optimization for
    classical and quantum photonics,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 41, A177–A190 (2024).
[14] Y. Xu, J.-Q. Yang, K. Fan, et al., “Physics-Informed Inverse Design of Programmable Meta-
    surfaces,” Adv. Sci. 11, 2406878 (2024).
[15] L. Su, D. Vercruysse, J. Skarda, et al., “Nanophotonic inverse design with SPINS: Software
    architecture and practical considerations,” Appl. Phys. Rev. 7, 011407 (2020).
[16] O. Tsilipakos, G. Perrakis, M. Farsari, et al., “Polymeric optical metasurfaces by two-photon
    lithography: Practical designs for beam steering,” in Metamaterials 2024, 1–3 (2024).
[17] R. S. Hegde, “Photonics inverse design: pairing deep neural networks with evolutionary
    algorithms,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 26, 1–8 (2019).
[18] S. So, T. Badloe, J. Noh, et al., “Deep learning enabled inverse design in nanophotonics,”
    Nanophotonics 9, 1041–1057 (2020).
[19] Y. Deng, S. Ren, K. Fan, et al., “Neural-adjoint method for the inverse design of all-dielectric
    metasurfaces,” Opt. Express 29, 7526–7534 (2021).
[20] Y. Yan, F. Li, J. Shen, et al., “Highly intelligent forward design of metamaterials empowered
    by circuit-physics-driven deep learning,” Laser Photonics Rev. , 2400724 (2024).
[21] C. C. Nadell, B. Huang, J. M. Malof, et al., “Deep learning for accelerated all-dielectric
    metasurface design,” Opt. Express 27, 27523–27535 (2019).
[22] S. Sarkar, A. Ji, Z. Jermain, et al., “Physics-Informed Machine Learning for Inverse Design of
    Optical Metamaterials,” Adv. Photonics Res. 4, 2300158 (2023).
[23] L. Xu, M. Rahmani, Y. Ma, et al., “Enhanced light–matter interactions in dielectric nanos-
    tructures via machine-learning approach,” Adv. Photonics 2, 026003 (2020).
[24] Y. Jing, H. Chu, B. Huang, et al., “A deep neural network for general scattering matrix,”
    Nanophotonics 12, 2583–2591 (2023).
[25] A.-P. Blanchard-Dionne and O. J. F. Martin, “Teaching optics to a machine learning network,”
    Opt. Lett. 45, 2922–2925 (2020).
[26] T. Zhang, C. Y. Kee, Y. S. Ang, et al., “Symmetry Enhanced Network Architecture Search for
    Complex Metasurface Design,” IEEE Access 10, 73533–73547 (2022).


                                               16
[27] S. So, J. Mun, and J. Rho, “Simultaneous Inverse Design of Materials and Structures via Deep
     Learning: Demonstration of Dipole Resonance Engineering Using Core–Shell Nanoparticles,”
    ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 24264–24268 (2019).
[28] X. Ma, Y. Ma, P. Cunha, et al., “Strategical Deep Learning for Photonic Bound States in the
     Continuum,” Laser Photonics Rev. 16, 2100658 (2022).
[29] O. Khatib, S. Ren, J. Malof, et al., “Learning the Physics of All-Dielectric Metamaterials with
     Deep Lorentz Neural Networks,” Adv. Opt. Mater. 10, 2200097 (2022).
[30] W. Ma, F. Cheng, Y. Xu, et al., “Probabilistic Representation and Inverse Design of Meta-
     materials Based on a Deep Generative Model with Semi-Supervised Learning Strategy,” Adv.
    Mater. 31, 1901111 (2019).
[31] J. Guimbao, L. Sanchis, L. Weituschat, et al., “Numerical optimization of a nanophotonic
     cavity by machine learning for near-unity photon indistinguishability at room temperature,”
    ACS Photonics 9, 1926–1935 (2022).
[32] Z. Liu, D. Zhu, S. P. Rodrigues, et al., “Generative Model for the Inverse Design of Metasurfaces,”
    Nano Lett. 18, 6570–6576 (2018).
[33] J. Xu, P. Xu, Z. Yang, et al., “Freeform metasurface design with a conditional generative
     adversarial network,” Appl. Phys. A 130, 530 (2024).
[34] T. Gahlmann and P. Tassin, “Deep neural networks for the prediction of the optical properties
     and the free-form inverse design of metamaterials,” Phys. Rev. B 106, 085408 (2022).
[35] C. Yeung, B. Pham, R. Tsai, et al., “DeepAdjoint: An All-in-One Photonic Inverse Design
     Framework Integrating Data-Driven Machine Learning with Optimization Algorithms,” ACS
    Photonics 10, 884–891 (2023).
[36] M. H. Tahersima, K. Kojima, T. Koike-Akino, et al., “Deep Neural Network Inverse Design of
     Integrated Photonic Power Splitters,” Sci. Rep. 9, 1368 (2019).
[37] Y. Qian, B. Ni, Z. Feng, et al., “Deep Learning for the Design of Random Coding Metasurfaces,”
    Plasmonics 18, 1941–1948 (2023).
[38] D. Liu, Y. Tan, E. Khoram, et al., “Training Deep Neural Networks for the Inverse Design of
     Nanophotonic Structures,” ACS Photonics 5, 1365–1369 (2018).
[39] A. V. Kildishev, O. Yesilyurt, V. Mkhitaryan, et al., “Inverse-designed superchiral dielectric
     metasurfaces,” in Metamaterials, Metadevices, and Metasystems 2024, PC1310916 (2024).
[40] G. You, C. Qian, S. Tan, et al., “Driving deep-learning-based metasurface design with Kramers-


                                                 17
     Kronig relations,” Phys. Rev. Appl. 22, L041002 (2024).
[41] Y. Gao, W. Chen, F. Li, et al., “Meta-Attention Deep Learning for Smart Development of
     Metasurface Sensors,” Adv. Sci. 11, 2405750 (2024).
[42] J. L. Su, J. W. You, L. Chen, et al., “MetaPhyNet: Intelligent design of large-scale metasurfaces
     based on physics-driven neural network,” J. Phys. Photonics 6, 035010 (2024).
[43] Z. A. Kudyshev, A. V. Kildishev, V. M. Shalaev, et al., “Machine learning–assisted global
     optimization of photonic devices,” Nanophotonics 10, 371–383 (2021).
[44] S. W. Kim, I. Kim, J. Lee, et al., “Knowledge Integration into deep learning in dynamical
     systems: An overview and taxonomy,” J. Mech. Sci. Technol. 35, 1331–1342 (2021).
[45] G. E. Karniadakis, I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, et al., “Physics-informed machine learning,” Nat.
    Rev. Phys. 3, 422–440 (2021).
[46] J. Zhang, J. W. You, F. Feng, et al., “Physics-Driven Machine-Learning Approach Incorpo-
     rating Temporal Coupled Mode Theory for Intelligent Design of Metasurfaces,” IEEE Trans.
    Microwave Theory Tech. 71, 2875–2887 (2023).
[47] X. Ding, V. Devabhaktuni, B. Chattaraj, et al., “Neural-network approaches to electromagnetic-
     based modeling of passive components and their applications to high-frequency and high-speed
     nonlinear circuit optimization,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 52, 436–449 (2004).
[48] S. Liu, F. Feng, X. Huang, et al., “Novel Neuro-Coupling Matrix Technique for Parametric
     Modeling of Microwave Filters,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Technol. Lett. 34, 871–874 (2024).
[49] F. Alpeggiani, N. Parappurath, E. Verhagen, et al., “Quasinormal-Mode Expansion of the
     Scattering Matrix,” Phys. Rev. X 7, 021035 (2017).
[50] H. Zhang and O. D. Miller, “Quasinormal Coupled Mode Theory,” (2020).
[51] P. Lalanne, W. Yan, K. Vynck, et al., “Light Interaction with Photonic and Plasmonic
     Resonances,” Laser Photonics Rev. 12, 1700113 (2018).
[52] P. T. Kristensen, K. Herrmann, F. Intravaia, et al., “Modeling electromagnetic resonators
     using quasinormal modes,” Adv. Opt. Photonics 12, 612–708 (2020).
[53] T. Weiss and E. A. Muljarov, “How to calculate the pole expansion of the optical scattering
     matrix from the resonant states,” Phys. Rev. B 98, 085433 (2018).
[54] M. Benzaouia, J. D. Joannopoulos, S. G. Johnson, et al., “Quasi-normal mode theory of the
     scattering matrix, enforcing fundamental constraints for truncated expansions,” Phys. Rev.
    Res. 3, 033228 (2021).


                                                18
[55] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,” arXiv , 1412.6980
    (2017).
[56] T. Gahlmann and P. Tassin, “Evaluation of machine learning techniques for conditional
    generative adversarial networks in inverse design,” arXiv , 2502.11934 (2025).
[57] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, et al., “Densely connected convolutional networks,”
    in 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2261–2269
    (2017).
[58] S. Raza, M. Hammood, N. A. F. Jaeger, et al., “Fabrication-aware inverse design with shape
    optimization for photonic integrated circuits,” Opt. Lett. 50(1), 117–120 (2025).
[59] R. P. Jenkins, S. D. Campbell, and D. H. Werner, “Establishing exhaustive metasurface
    robustness against fabrication uncertainties through deep learning,” Nanophotonics 10(18),
    4497–4509 (2021).




                                              19
